Lily Dinkins ENEC 370 Field Trip \#1

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Day and meal**                   **Common name of ingredient/food**   ***Genus species* (all ingredients)\***   **Domestication site of species**                                                                                                          **My food actually came from \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_**
  ---------------------------------- ------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  *August 29^th^, Breakfast *

  Fried Egg                          Egg                                  *Gallus domesticus*                       South East Asia (Lawler, 2014)                                                                                                             I spoke to a manager on the phone who said he would have to send an email out to Trader Joe’s and wouldn’t get a response for a few days. He said he thinks the eggs are most likely not from North Carolina though. I also sent an email request but received no response.

  Extra Virgin Olive Oil             Extra Virgin Olive Oil               *Olea europaea*                           Mediterranean Basin (Diez *et al.,* 2015)                                                                                                  Italy, Spain, Argentina and Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Trader Joe’s Extra Virgin Olive Oil label

  Frozen Spinach                     Spinach                              *Spinacia oleracea*                       Persia (Simoons, 1991)                                                                                                                     I called Harris Teeter twice and both times it directed me to a spam number asking about my vacationing habits. Seventy percent of spinach in the US is grown in California though, so my best guess is that it comes from there (Naeve, 2015).

  Tuttorosso Canned diced tomatoes   Tomatoes                             *Solanum lycopersicum*                    Central America (Estabrook, 2012)                                                                                                          Indiana, Michigan or Ohio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: I spoke to a customer service representative on the phone and she said these are the three states where their tomatoes are grown. She said she could not give me more specific information.

                                     Tomato juice                         *Solanum lycopersicum*                    Central America (Estabrook, 2012)                                                                                                          Indiana, Michigan or Ohio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: I spoke to a customer service representative on the phone and she said these are the three states where their tomatoes are grown. She said she could not give me more specific information.

                                     Salt                                 *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        N/A

                                     Naturally derived calcium chloride   *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        N/A

                                     Naturally derived citric acid        *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        N/A

  Yellow onion                       Yellow onion                         *Allium cepa*                             Southeast Asia and the Middle East, thought to have been domesticated simultaneously around 5,000 years ago (National Onion Association)   Louisville, KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: label on bag states “The Horton Fruit Co., INC. Louisville, Kentucky, 40218-2967”

  Sambal Oelek                       Chili                                *Capsicum annuum *                        Mexico (Kraft *et al.,* 2014)                                                                                                              Underwood Family Farms in Moorpark, California
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Huy Fong website

                                     Salt                                 *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        N/A

                                     Distilled vinegar                    *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        N/A

                                     Potassium sorbate                    *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        N/A

                                     Sodium bisulfite                     *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        N/A

  Sea Salt                           Sea Salt                             *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        Northern California Source: Trader Joe’s Sea Salt label

  Pepper                             Pepper                               *Piper nigrum*                            India (Kew)                                                                                                                                Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Drogheria Alimentari Organic Black Pepper Corns Mill label

  *August 29^th^, Dinner*

  Lentil Salad                       Lentils                              *Lens culinaris*                          Near East, “the cradle of agriculture” (Sonnante *et al.,* 2009)                                                                           Canada
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source:\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ziyad Brand All Natural Large Whole Lentils label

                                     Red onion                            *Allium cepa*                             Southeast Asia and the Middle East, thought to have been domesticated simultaneously around 5,000 years ago (National Onion Association)   Kettleman City, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Sticker on onion said Dalena Farms and I googled to find location

                                     Red bell pepper                      *Capsicum annuum*                         Mexico (Quiros, 2010)                                                                                                                      Holland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: sticker on vegetable says “Origin Holland / Pays-Bas”

                                     Basil                                *Ocimum basilicum*                        India (UC Davis, 2011)                                                                                                                     My kitchen table! I have a fresh basil plant my dad potted from his herb garden.

                                     Arugula                              *Eruca sativa*                            Mediterranean (Wright, 2001)                                                                                                               Earthbound Farm, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Organic Baby Arugula Blend label

                                     Garlic                               *Allium sativum*                          Egypt or India (Simon, 2016)                                                                                                               USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Trader Joes Fresh Garlic label

  Balsamic Vinaigrette               Extra Virgin Olive Oil               *Olea europaea*                           Mediterranean Basin (Diez *et al.,* 2015)                                                                                                  Italy, Spain, Argentina and Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Trader Joe’s Extra Virgin Olive Oil label

                                     Sea Salt                             *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        Northern California Source: Trader Joe’s Sea Salt label

                                     Pepper                               *Piper nigrum*                            India (Kew)                                                                                                                                Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Drogheria Alimentari Organic Black Pepper Corns Mill label

                                     Garlic                               *Allium sativum*                          Egypt or India (Simon, 2016)                                                                                                               USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Trader Joes Fresh Garlic label
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I had the same issue asking for more specifics as the eggs, the manager I spoke to said he would have to put in an email request that would take a couple days. Most garlic in the US is grown in California, Nevada, and Oregon (Boriss, 2014).

  Harris Teeter Dijon mustard        Water                                *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        I called Harris Teeter twice and both times it directed me to a spam number asking about my vacationing habits.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Manufactured in Matthews, NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Harris Teeter Dijon Mustard label

                                     Mustard seed                         *Brassica nigra*                          Iran (Singh, 2013)                                                                                                                         I called Harris Teeter twice and both times it directed me to a spam number asking about my vacationing habits.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Manufactured in Matthews, NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Harris Teeter Dijon Mustard label
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mustard is mostly grown in Idaho, Montana, North Dakota, Oregon and Washington and could have come from any of these states (Boland, 2013).

                                     Distilled vinegar                    *N/A*                                     *N/A*                                                                                                                                      *N/A*

                                     Salt                                 *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        *N/A*

                                     White wine                           *Vitis* *vinifera*                        Near East (Myles *et al.,* 2011)                                                                                                           I called Harris Teeter twice and both times it directed me to a spam number asking about my vacationing habits.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Manufactured in Matthews, NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Harris Teeter Dijon Mustard label
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               The white wine is most likely from California since around 90% of American wine is from there (Puckette, 2013).

                                     Citric acid                          *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        *N/A*

                                     Turmeric                             *Curcuma longa*                           India (Avey, 2015)                                                                                                                         I called Harris Teeter twice and both times it directed me to a spam number asking about my vacationing habits.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Manufactured in Matthews, NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Harris Teeter Dijon Mustard label
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Eighty percent of the world’s turmeric is grown in India (APEDA).

                                     Tartaric acid                        *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        N/A

                                     Spices                               *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        N/A

  Balsamic vinegar                   Concentrated grape must              *Vitis* *vinifera*                        Near East (Myles *et al.,* 2011)                                                                                                           Modena, Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Monari Federzoni Balsamic Vinegar of Modena Label

                                     Caramel color                        *N/A *                                    N/A                                                                                                                                        The websites where I researched

                                     Wine vinegar                         *Vitis* *vinifera*                        Near East (Myles *et al.,* 2011)                                                                                                           Modena, Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Source: Monari Federzoni Balsamic Vinegar of Modena Label

  *August 29^th^, Snack*

  Sabra Red Pepper Hummus            Chickpeas                            *Cicer arietinum*                         Turkey, Syria and Iran (Kew)                                                                                                               I spoke to Kay from Customer Service on the phone and they do not release any farm information but all the ingredients are from the USA and there are two distribution locations in Oceanside, VA and Farmingville, NY.

                                     Tahini – sesame seeds                *Sesamum indicum*                         -   India (Bedigian, 2002)                                                                                                                 “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sesame seeds are really only grown in Paris, Texas in the United States (Hanson, 2016). The majority of global sesame comes from India (Hanson, 2016).

                                     Roasted red bell peppers             *Capsicum annuum*                         Mexico (Quiros, 2010)                                                                                                                      Bell peppers are most commonly grown in California in the United States but since Sabra is located on the east coast it’s likely their farms are as well (Naeve, 2015).

                                     Sugar                                *Saccharum officinarum*                   New Guinea (Cope)                                                                                                                          “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sugar in the United States is grown in Florida, Hawaii, Louisiana and Texas (McConnell, 2016).

                                     Cultured dextrose                    *Bos taurus*                              Near east (Bollongino *et al.,* 2012)                                                                                                      “

                                     Paprika                              *Capsicum annuum*                         Mexico (Anderson, 2007)                                                                                                                    “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Paprika is most likely grown in California in the US (New World Encyclopedia, 2008)

                                     Canola oil                           *Brassica Napus*                          Mediterranean (Raymer, 2002)                                                                                                               “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Canola is mostly grown in North Dakota in the United States (US Canola Association)

                                     Salt                                 *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        “

                                     Lemon juice                          *Citrus* x *limon*                        China (Robertson)                                                                                                                          “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Most lemons are grown in California in the US (Crane, 2010).

                                     Citric acid                          *N/A*                                     N/A                                                                                                                                        “

                                     Garlic powder                        *Allium sativum*                          Egypt or India (Simon, 2016)                                                                                                               “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Most garlic in the US is grown in California, Nevada, and Oregon (Boriss, 2014).

                                     Sugar gum                            *Eucalyptus cladocalyx*                   Australia (Hamilton, 2001)                                                                                                                 “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sugar gum is endemic to Australia (Hamilton, 2001).

  Red bell pepper                    Red bell pepper                      *Capsicum annuum*                         Mexico (Quiros, 2010)                                                                                                                      Holland Source: sticker on vegetable says “Origin Holland / Pays-Bas”
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**\***All genus species retrieved from Wikipedia

In total I had 33 entries (only counting the ones I researched not the
chemicals) with 22 species likely from nine countries. I wasn’t
surprised at how biodiverse my diet was but I was surprised at where my
food was from. The most shocking to me was that my red bell pepper from
Harris Teeter originated in Holland. Maybe I don’t know enough about the
agriculture business yet, but this makes no sense to me financially or
environmentally. The aspect of my diet that I definitely need to
reevaluate is the lack of local produce. Not a single thing I ate on
August 29^th^ was from North Carolina besides the basil from the plant
in my kitchen. I also was very surprised that bell pepper and paprika
are the same genus species. Some of the ingredients from the more
processed foods were so vague that it would have been impossible to
trace without knowing every aspect of the companies recipe. For example,
when I googled “caramel color” I found that it can be made with either
corn or wheat and there’s not real way of knowing without company
specifics. Same with the Harris Teeter mustard that listed “spices” as
an ingredient. Another aspect of my diet that struck me was how much of
my food was potentially from California. I know that California is a
major farming state but I had no idea how prolific. When I’ve thought of
California agriculture I think of tomatoes, almonds, avocados, and wine.
I wish it had been possible to find more information about specific
tomato and pepper breeds. The only hybrid I had on my list was lemons
but I’m sure some of the other produce was hybrid as well. Most of the
species I ate were domesticated in the “Near East”, Asia and the
Mediterranean.

**References**

Anderson, N. O. (2006). *Flower breeding and genetics: Issues,
challenges and opportunities for the 21st century*. Dordrecht: Springer.

Avey, T. (2015, March 09). What is the History of Turmeric? Retrieved
September 07, 2016, from
http://www.pbs.org/food/the-history-kitchen/turmeric-history/

Basil. (2011). Retrieved September 05, 2016, from
<http://www.goodlifegarden.ucdavis.edu/crops/id/67>

Bedigian, D. (2003, November). Evolution of sesame revisited:
Domestication, diversity and prospects. *Genetic Resources and Crop
Evolution*, 50(7), 779-787. doi:10.1023/A:1025029903549

Boland, M. (2013, April). Mustard. Retrieved September 07, 2016, from
<http://www.agmrc.org/commodities-> products/grains-oilseeds/mustard/

Bollongino, R., Burger, J., Powell, A., Mashkour, M., Vigne, J., &
Thomas, M. G. (2012). Modern Taurine Cattle Descended from Small Number
of Near-Eastern Founders. *Molecular Biology and Evolution,* *29*(9),
2101-2104. doi:10.1093/molbev/mss092

Boriss, H. (2014, April). Garlic Profile. Retrieved September 07, 2016,
from
http://www.agmrc.org/commodities-products/vegetables/garlic-profile/

Cope, T. (Ed.). (n.d.). Saccharum officinarum (sugar cane). Retrieved
September 06, 2016, from
<http://www.kew.org/science-conservation/plants-fungi/saccharum-officinarum-sugar-cane>

Crane, J. H. (2010, December). Lemon Growing in the Florida Home
Landscape. Retrieved from
http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/pdffiles/HS/HS40200.pdf

Diez, C. M., Trujillo, I., Martinez-Urdiroz, N., Barranco, D., Rallo,
L., Marfil, P., & Gaut, B. S. (2014). Olive domestication and
diversification in the Mediterranean Basin. *New Phytologist New
Phytol,* *206*(1), 436- 447. doi:10.1111/nph.13181

Estabrook, B. (2012). *Tomatoland: How modern industrial agriculture
destroyed our most alluring fruit*. Andrews McMeel Publishing.

Hamilton, L. (2001). The Sugar Gum Story: The Marketing Success of a
Humble Shelter Tree. Retrieved September 06, 2016, from
<http://www.regional.org.au/au/iufro/2001/hamilton.htm>

Hanson, R. (2016, July). Sesame Profile. Retrieved September 07, 2016,
from
http://www.agmrc.org/commodities-products/grains-oilseeds/sesame-profile/

History of Onions. (n.d.). Retrieved September 05, 2016, from
<https://www.onions-usa.org/all-about-> onions/history-of-onions

Kraft, K. H., Brown, C. H., Nabhan, G. P., Luedeling, E., Ruiz, J. D.,
D'eeckenbrugge, G. C., Gepts, P. (2014). Multiple lines of evidence for
the origin of domesticated chili pepper, Capsicum annuum, in Mexico.
*Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,* *111*(17), 6165-6170.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1308933111

Lawler, A. (2014). *Why did the chicken cross the world?: The epic saga
of the bird that powers civilization*. Atria Books.

McConnell, M. (2016, June 3). Sugar & Sweeteners: Background. Retrieved
September 07, 2016, from
http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/crops/sugar-sweeteners/background.aspx

Myles, S., Boyko, A. R., Owens, C. L., Brown, P. J., Grassi, F.,
Aradhya, M. K., . . . Buckler, E. S. (2011). Genetic structure and
domestication history of the grape. *Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences,* *108*(9), 3530-3535. doi:10.1073/pnas.1009363108

Naeve, L. (2015, August). Spinach. Retrieved September 06, 2016, from
<http://www.agmrc.org/commodities-> products/vegetables/spinach/

Naeve, L. (2015, August). Spinach. Retrieved September 07, 2016, from
<http://www.agmrc.org/commodities-> products/vegetables/spinach/

Paprika. (2008, August 12). Retrieved September 07, 2016, from
http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Paprika

Piper nigrum (black pepper). (n.d.). Retrieved September 05, 2016, from
<http://www.kew.org/science->
conservation/plants-fungi/piper-nigrum-black-pepper

Puckette, M. (2013, January 16). Top 10 Wine Regions of The World | Wine
Folly. Retrieved September 06, 2016, from
http://winefolly.com/update/top-wine-regions-of-the-world/\#fb-root

Quiros, C. F. (2010, April 2). PEPPERS. Retrieved September 05, 2016,
from <http://www.plantsciences.ucdavis.edu/vc221/pepper/PEPPERrd.htm>

Raymer, P.L. (2002) Canola: An emerging oilseed crop. *Trends in new
crops and new uses*. Alexandria: ASHS.

Simon, P. W. (2016, August 13). The origins and distribution of garlic:
How many garlics are there? Retrieved September 05, 2016, from
<https://www.ars.usda.gov/midwest-area/madison-wi/vegetable-crops->
research/docs/simon-garlic-origins/

Simoons, F. J. (1991). *Food in China: A cultural and historical
inquiry*. Boca Raton: CRC Press.

Singh, B. P. (2013). *Biofuel crops: Production, physiology, and
genetics*. Boston: CABI.

Sonnante, G., Hammer, K., & Pignone, D. (2009). From the cradle of
agriculture a handful of lentils: History of domestication. *RENDICONTI
LINCEI Rend. Fis. Acc. Lincei,* *20*(1), 21-37. doi:10.1007/s12210-009-
0002-7

TURMERIC. (n.d.). Retrieved September 7, 2016, from
<http://apeda.gov.in/agriexchange/market>
profile/MOA/Product/Turmeric.pdf

Wright, C. A. (2001). *Mediterranean vegetables: A cook's ABC of
vegetables and their preparation in Spain, France, Italy, Greece,
Turkey, the Middle East, and north Africa with more than 200 authentic
recipes for the home cook*. Boston: Harvard Common Press.

![](avoid-GMO-foods.png)
